## bcbio with the Common Workflow Language (CWL)

This directory contains details on work to run bcbio using tools that support
the [Common Workflow Language (CWL)][0]. bcbio generates a CWL workflow from a
[YAML description file](https://bcbio-nextgen.readthedocs.org/en/latest/contents/configuration.html).
Any tool that supports CWL input can run this workflow. CWL-based tools do the
work of managing files and workflows, and bcbio takes care of the biological
analysis using a Docker container or local install.

This is a work in progress and not a complete production implementation. The
documentation orients anyone interested in helping with development.

### Current status

bcbio currently supports creation of CWL for alignment, coverage assessment, HLA
typing and quality control. It generates a
[CWL draft 2](http://common-workflow-language.github.io/draft-2/) compatible
workflow. The actual biological code execution during runs works with either the
bcbio docker container ([bcbio/bcbio](https://hub.docker.com/r/bcbio/bcbio/)) or
a local installation.

We'd like to expand support for other portions of bcbio in CWL. The first target
is more flexible batching and splitting of samples. We currently have two
working parallelization schemes: split by a single sample, or process all
samples at the same time. Flexible batches would enable:

- Parallelizing alignment by splitting into fastq sections. The requires
  indexing the input files so we know how to split and combine results.

- Variant calling. This needs parallelization by chromosome region, with the
  blocks generated by the initial CWL run after aligning and determining
  callable regions.

- Combine together batched samples at required points in the analysis. The
  enables pooled and tumor-normal calling.

We also need to evaluate the workflow on larger, real life analyses. This includes:

- Running on CWL runners like [Arvados](https://arvados.org/). Everything is
  currently evaluated with [cwltool][1].

- Enable checkpointing of analysis so we can re-start a failed workflow at the
  previous end point.

- Test parallelization on single machines and over multiple machines with
  distributed CWL runners.

### Running

To prepare your system for running you first need to install cwltool
from the [common workflow language reference implementation][1]:
```
git clone https://github.com/common-workflow-language/cwltool.git
cd cwltool
python setup.py install
```
Then you need [bcbio-vm](https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio-nextgen-vm), which
generates the CWL command line wrapper. You can install with `conda install -c
bioconda bcbio-nextgen-vm` The analysis work happens inside either a bcbio
Docker container or a [local installation of bcbio][3]. You don't need to
install genome data since the tests use small local data.

Next clone the [bcbio GitHub repository locally][2] to get the test suite and
run a minimal CWL workflow generated automatically by bcbio from the inputs:
```
git clone https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio-nextgen.git
cd bcbio-nextgen/tests
./run_tests.sh cwl_local
./run_tests.sh cwl_docker
```
This will create a CWL workflow inside `test_automated_output` which you can run
again manually with either a local bcbio installation:
```
cwltool --verbose --preserve-environment PATH HOME --no-container \
  run_info-bam-workflow/main-run_info-cwl.cwl \
  run_info-bam-workflow/main-run_info-cwl-samples.json
```
or with bcbio inside a Docker container:

```
cwltool --verbose run_info-bam-workflow/main-run_info-cwl.cwl run_info-bam-workflow/main-run_info-cwl-samples.json
```
To generate CWL directly from a sample input and the test bcbio system file:
```
bcbio_vm.py cwl ../data/automated/run_info-cwl.yaml --systemconfig bcbio_system.yaml
```

### Development notes

bcbio generates a common workflow language description. Internally, bcbio
represents the files and information related to processing as
[a comprehensive dictionary](https://bcbio-nextgen.readthedocs.org/en/latest/contents/code.html#data).
This world object describes the state of a run and associated files, and new
processing steps update or add information to it. The world object is roughly
equivalent to CWL's JSON-based input object, but CWL enforces additional
annotations to identify files and models new inputs/outputs at each step. The
work in bcbio is to move from our laissez-faire approach to the more structured
CWL model.

The generated CWL workflow is in `run_info-cwl-workflow`:

- `main-*.cwl` -- the top level CWL file describing the workflow steps
- `main*-samples.json` -- the flattened bcbio world structure represented as
  CWL inputs
- `wf-*.cwl` -- CWL sub-workflows, describing sample level parallel processing
  of a section of the workflow, with potential internal parallelization.
- `steps/*.cwl` -- CWL descriptions of sections of code run inside bcbio. Each
  of these are potential parallelization points and make up the nodes in the
  workflow.

To help with defining the outputs at each step, there is a `WorldWatcher` object
that can output changed files and world dictionary objects between steps in the
pipeline when running a bcbio in the standard way. The
[https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio-nextgen/blob/master/bcbio/pipeline/main.py](variant
pipeline) has examples using it. This is useful when preparing the CWL
definitions of inputs and outputs for new steps in the [bcbio CWL step definitions](https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio-nextgen/blob/master/bcbio/cwl/workflow.py).

### ToDo

These are additional items beyond the immediate priorities listed under `Current
Status`:

- Determine when we should skip steps based on configuration to avoid writing
  them to the CWL file. For instance, right now we include HLA typing even if
  it's not defined and have an extra do-nothing step in the CWL output. We
  should have a clean way to skip writing this step if not needed based on the
  configuration.

- Replace the custom python code in the
  [bcbio step definitions](https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio-nextgen/blob/master/bcbio/cwl/workflow.py)
  with a higher level DSL in YAML we can parse and translate to CWL.

- Support the full variant calling workflow with additional steps like
  disambiguation.

- Port RNA-seq and small RNA workflows to CWL.

[0]: https://github.com/common-workflow-language/common-workflow-language
[1]: https://github.com/common-workflow-language/cwltool
[2]: https://github.com/chapmanb/bcbio-nextgen
[3]: https://bcbio-nextgen.readthedocs.org/en/latest/contents/installation.html
